tRNA gene hits are the matches identified between tRNA-seq seeds -- the predicted tRNA transcripts from one or more tRNA-seq samples -- and tRNA genes in an associated (meta)genomic sample. %(anvi-integrate-trnaseq)s stores a `trna-gene-hits` table in the %(trnaseq-contigs-db)s. This table not only contains information to match seeds with genes, but also the identities of unmodified nucleotides at sites of predicted modification-induced substitutions.

Here is an example with samples from a single organism. %(anvi-gen-contigs-database)s is used to make a %(contigs-db)s from the organism's genomic sequences. tRNA-seq samples are analyzed by the %(trnaseq-workflow)s. Outputs of the workflow include a %(trnaseq-contigs-db)s from %(anvi-merge-trnaseq)s and tables of consolidated data -- %(seeds-specific-txt)s, %(seeds-nonspecific-txt)s, and %(modifications-txt)s -- from %(anvi-tabulate-trnaseq)s. tRNA seeds can be formed from de novo tRNA predictions of one or more tRNA-seq samples: hopefully most tRNAs are expressed at measurable levels in all samples. %(anvi-integrate-trnaseq)s compares seeds to tRNA genes to find confident matches and stores them in the `trna-gene-hits` table. It is common for a genome to have multiple copies of the same tRNA gene, resulting in a seed matched with multiple genes.

tRNA-seq samples from a metagenome differ because tRNA transcripts can arise from identical genes in multiple organisms. %(anvi-integrate-trnaseq)s can be aware of bins to restrict hits to seeds that match genes in only one bin and not genes in any other bins or unbinned contigs.
