This program generates a pangenome supplemented representative genome from a set of supplied genomes and an already computed pangenome.

### Prerequisites

Before running this program, the following inputs must already exist:

- A %(pan-db)s and %(genomes-storage-db)s generated by running %(anvi-pan-genome)s on your genomes. Each genome must have a %(contigs-db)s created with %(anvi-gen-contigs-database)s from a %(contigs-fasta)s with simple deflines. If your FASTA file does not have simple deflines, use %(anvi-script-reformat-fasta)s to fix it first.
- An %(external-genomes)s file listing all genomes and their contigs database paths, which can be generated with %(anvi-script-gen-genomes-file)s.

Optionally, each %(contigs-db)s may include functional annotations added by programs such as %(anvi-run-kegg-kofams)s, %(anvi-run-ncbi-cogs)s, %(anvi-run-hmms)s, or %(anvi-run-scg-taxonomy)s. If present, these annotations will be carried over into the output database.

%(anvi-gen-pan-representative)s will produce a %(contigs-db)s variant `pan-genome`. The %(anvi-gen-pan-representative)s includes the whole genome which is selected as representative of the supplied genomes, supplemented with contig that includes a representative gene for each of the gene clusters in the pangenome that are not already present in the representative genome.

The default usage is simple, which will simply instruct anvi’o to select a representative with the best combination between lower contamination, higher completeness and less number of contigs. The tool will keep the contigs of the representative genome, and then select from within the remaining genomes for the genes that represent the gene clusters that haven't been covered and concatenates them in a supplementary contig. 

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-pan-representative -p %(pan-db)s -g %(genomes-storage-db)s -e %(external-genomes)s \
                            -o PATH/TO/OUTPUT.db
{{ codestop }} 

### Different options to generate the pangenome supplemented representative genome

`--output-file` (required) The path for the output %(contigs-db)s. Must end in `.db`.

`--gap-size` In the pangenome supplement contig the sequences are joined by a gap of 20 N. Use this flag to change the size of the gap.

`--representative` Use this flag to manually select the representative genome. If not given, the program will choose the genome representative using the alpha value.

`--alpha` A weight that controls the balance between genome quality and assembly contiguity when selecting the representative genome. The score for each candidate genome is computed as `alpha * normalized(completeness - redundancy) + (1 - alpha) * normalized(fewer contigs)`, where both terms are independently normalized across all genomes before combining. An alpha value of 1 considers only completeness and redundancy; a value of 0 considers only the number of contigs. The default is 0.8.

`--max-num-contigs` This can be used to select a representative genome with a user defined maximal number of contigs. If not given, the program will use alpha to select a representative

`--min-genomes-per-gene-cluster` Allow the user to discard gene clusters to be added to the supplementary contig if a minimal number of given genomes is not represented. Default is 1 to keep all gene clusters.

`--keep-synteny` By default, the supplementary contig is built by adding a representative gene from start codon to stop codon into the contig, joined by 20 N even if two genes are next to each other in the original contig. Keep synteny option will keep from start codon of the first gene to the stop codon of the last gene that sit together and have not been represented yet. Additionally, it will keep as much synteny as possible when selecting missing genes in the supplemental contig.

`--keep-promoter` Keeps the flanking regions of the genes that will be added to the supplemental contig. By definition, it also keeps synteny.

