anvio/docs/programs/anvi-gen-contigs-database.md, before:

The input for this program is a %(contigs-fasta)s, which should contain one or more sequences. These sequences may belong to a single genome or could be many contigs obtained from an assembly or a single sequence of any kind.

Make sure the input file matches the requirements of a %(contigs-fasta)s. If you are planning to use the resulting contigs-db with %(anvi-profile)s, it is essential that you convert your %(fasta)s file to a properly formatted %(contigs-fasta)s *before* you perform the read recruitment.

The contigs database is one of the most essential components of anvi'o, and a contigs database will keep all the information related to your sequences: positions of open reading frames, k-mer frequencies for each contig, functional and taxonomic annotation of genes, etc. 

When run on a %(contigs-fasta)s this program will,

* **Compute k-mer frequencies** for each contig (the default is `4`, but you can change it using `--kmer-size` parameter if you feel adventurous).

* **Soft-split contigs** longer than 20,000 bp into smaller ones (you can change the split size using the `--split-length` flag). When the gene calling step is not skipped, the process of splitting contigs will consider where genes are and avoid cutting genes in the middle. For very, very large assemblies this process can take a while, and you can skip it with `--skip-mindful-splitting` flag.

* **Identify open reading frames** using [Prodigal](http://prodigal.ornl.gov/), UNLESS, (1) you have used the flag `--skip-gene-calling` (no gene calls will be made) or (2) you have provided %(external-gene-calls)s.

{:.notice}
This program can work with compressed input FASTA files (i.e., the file name ends with a `.gz` extention).

### Create a contigs database from a FASTA file

The simplest form of this command that will give you a %(contigs-db)s is the following:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s
{{ codestop }}

But we suggest you to explicitly assign a unique 'project name' for each contigs-db you are generating through the `--project-name` parameter. Project name becomes an idenfitier of a contigs-db for most downstream analyses, and when you are working with many contigs-db files, non-unique names for each one of them may lead to various issues. Here is an example for a single genome:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f Patient_6557_E_faecalis_cultivar.fa \
                          --project-name E_faecalis_P6557 \
                          -o E_faecalis_P6557.db
{{ codestop }}

and a metagenome:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f scaffolds.fa \
                          --project-name North_Atlantic_MGX_004 \
                          -o North_Atlantic_MGX_004.db
{{ codestop }}

There are a myriad of programs you can run on a %(contigs-db)s once it is created to add more and more layers of information on it. Please see the artifact %(contigs-db)s to see a list of steps you can follow.

### Create a contigs database with external gene calls

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --external-gene-calls %(external-gene-calls)s
{{ codestop }}

See %(external-gene-calls)s for the description and formatting requirements of this file.

If user-provided or anvi'o-calculated amino acid sequences contain internal stop codons, anvi'o will yield an error. The following command will persist through this error:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --external-gene-calls %(external-gene-calls)s \
                          --ignore-internal-stop-codons
{{ codestop }}

### Changing k-mer size

You can change the k-mer size by modifying the `--kmer-size` parameter:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --kmer-size 3
{{ codestop }}

A word of caution: you can increase the k-mer size up to a maximum of k=5 for standard installations of anvi'o. This is because the contigs database stores the k-mer frequencies in a big table with one column per k-mer, and SQLite has an upper limit on the number of columns per table. [The default limit is 2,000 columns](https://www.sqlite.org/limits.html), which translates into an upper limit of k=5 (with 4^5 = 1,096 possible k-mers). Trying to increase `k` beyond this point will result in the following error: `sqlite3.OperationalError: too many columns on kmer_contigs`.

If you want to increase `k` even further, you can re-compile the `sqlite3` library to increase the column limit (the constant `SQLITE_MAX_COLUMN`). Note that you can only increase this limit up to a maximum of 32,000 columns, which makes k=7 (with 4^7 = 16,384 possible k-mers) the new upper limit for k-mer size.

<div class="extra-info" markdown="1">

<span class="extra-info-header">Increasing the k-mer size limit to k=7</span>

[Sebastian Treitli](https://anvio.org/people/treitlis/) shared his workflow for re-compiling `sqlite3` with larger column limits on Discord ([here is the link to the relevant message](https://discord.com/channels/1002537821212512296/1239881490637127701/1240313108799553659)). Here are the initial steps, which are based on [this StackExchange thread](https://dba.stackexchange.com/questions/221508/how-to-increase-column-limit-of-a-table-in-sqlite):

1. Go to download page [https://sqlite.org/download.html](https://sqlite.org/download.html)
2. Download the pre-release snapshot archive
3. Extract it with `tar -xvzf "sqlite-snapshot-202405081757.tar.gz"`
4. Change to that directory: `cd sqlite-snapshot-202405081757`
5. Run `./configure`
6. Edit the `Makefile`. Find inside the Makefile the line that starts with DEFS = and append to this line `-DSQLITE_MAX_COLUMN=32767`. Save the file
7. Run `make` to compile

After this, the newly-compiled library has to be moved into your anvi'o environment, at the same location where the original library was installed. This step will differ for everyone depending on their anvi'o installation, but we assume that if you are at this point, you probably know what you are doing :)

8. Copy the compiled library to the conda `lib` directory, which would look something like this (paths are not exact and depend on your system/anvi'o installation): `cp /path/to/compiled/sqlite/.libs/libsqlite3.so.0.8.6 /home/user/miniconda3/envs/anvio-7.1/lib/libsqlite3.so.0.8.6`
9. Copy the compiled executable to the conda `bin` directory, which would look something like this (paths are not exact and depend on your system/anvi’o installation): `cp /path/to/compiled/sqlite/sqlite3 /home/user/miniconda3/envs/anvio-7.1/bin/sqlite3`
10. Done :) Go forth and use (slightly) higher k-mer sizes!

</div>

Commit message:

Added flag to allow for amino acid contig dbs

anvio/docs/programs/anvi-gen-contigs-database.md, after:

The input for this program is a %(contigs-fasta)s, which should contain one or more sequences. These sequences may belong to a single genome or could be many contigs obtained from an assembly or a single sequence of any kind.

Make sure the input file matches the requirements of a %(contigs-fasta)s. If you are planning to use the resulting contigs-db with %(anvi-profile)s, it is essential that you convert your %(fasta)s file to a properly formatted %(contigs-fasta)s *before* you perform the read recruitment.

The contigs database is one of the most essential components of anvi'o, and a contigs database will keep all the information related to your sequences: positions of open reading frames, k-mer frequencies for each contig, functional and taxonomic annotation of genes, etc. 

When run on a %(contigs-fasta)s this program will,

* **Compute k-mer frequencies** for each contig (the default is `4`, but you can change it using `--kmer-size` parameter if you feel adventurous).

* **Soft-split contigs** longer than 20,000 bp into smaller ones (you can change the split size using the `--split-length` flag). When the gene calling step is not skipped, the process of splitting contigs will consider where genes are and avoid cutting genes in the middle. For very, very large assemblies this process can take a while, and you can skip it with `--skip-mindful-splitting` flag.

* **Identify open reading frames** using [Prodigal](http://prodigal.ornl.gov/), UNLESS, (1) you have used the flag `--skip-gene-calling` (no gene calls will be made) or (2) you have provided %(external-gene-calls)s.

{:.notice}
This program can work with compressed input FASTA files (i.e., the file name ends with a `.gz` extention).

### Create a contigs database from a FASTA file

The simplest form of this command that will give you a %(contigs-db)s is the following:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s
{{ codestop }}

But we suggest you to explicitly assign a unique 'project name' for each contigs-db you are generating through the `--project-name` parameter. Project name becomes an idenfitier of a contigs-db for most downstream analyses, and when you are working with many contigs-db files, non-unique names for each one of them may lead to various issues. Here is an example for a single genome:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f Patient_6557_E_faecalis_cultivar.fa \
                          --project-name E_faecalis_P6557 \
                          -o E_faecalis_P6557.db
{{ codestop }}

and a metagenome:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f scaffolds.fa \
                          --project-name North_Atlantic_MGX_004 \
                          -o North_Atlantic_MGX_004.db
{{ codestop }}

There are a myriad of programs you can run on a %(contigs-db)s once it is created to add more and more layers of information on it. Please see the artifact %(contigs-db)s to see a list of steps you can follow.

### Create a contigs database with external gene calls

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --external-gene-calls %(external-gene-calls)s
{{ codestop }}

See %(external-gene-calls)s for the description and formatting requirements of this file.

If user-provided or anvi'o-calculated amino acid sequences contain internal stop codons, anvi'o will yield an error. The following command will persist through this error:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --external-gene-calls %(external-gene-calls)s \
                          --ignore-internal-stop-codons
{{ codestop }}

### Using amino acid sequences to start

While anvi'o will translate nucleotide sequences to amino acids, there may be a case where you would want to generate a database with amino acids and not nucleotides. We recommend letting anvi'o handle translation internally, but if you wish to, using this flag will allow anvio to generate a database with non-nucleotides. If you do choose to run this flag, then gene calling will not work since we utilize prodigal which expects nucleotide. You will need to supply a fasta that has already undergone gene calling in this case where each fasta entry represents a protein. 

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --external-gene-calls %(external-gene-calls)s \
                          --allow-amino-acid-contig-db
{{ codestop }}

### Changing k-mer size

You can change the k-mer size by modifying the `--kmer-size` parameter:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f %(contigs-fasta)s \
                          -o %(contigs-db)s \
                          --kmer-size 3
{{ codestop }}

A word of caution: you can increase the k-mer size up to a maximum of k=5 for standard installations of anvi'o. This is because the contigs database stores the k-mer frequencies in a big table with one column per k-mer, and SQLite has an upper limit on the number of columns per table. [The default limit is 2,000 columns](https://www.sqlite.org/limits.html), which translates into an upper limit of k=5 (with 4^5 = 1,096 possible k-mers). Trying to increase `k` beyond this point will result in the following error: `sqlite3.OperationalError: too many columns on kmer_contigs`.

If you want to increase `k` even further, you can re-compile the `sqlite3` library to increase the column limit (the constant `SQLITE_MAX_COLUMN`). Note that you can only increase this limit up to a maximum of 32,000 columns, which makes k=7 (with 4^7 = 16,384 possible k-mers) the new upper limit for k-mer size.

<div class="extra-info" markdown="1">

<span class="extra-info-header">Increasing the k-mer size limit to k=7</span>

[Sebastian Treitli](https://anvio.org/people/treitlis/) shared his workflow for re-compiling `sqlite3` with larger column limits on Discord ([here is the link to the relevant message](https://discord.com/channels/1002537821212512296/1239881490637127701/1240313108799553659)). Here are the initial steps, which are based on [this StackExchange thread](https://dba.stackexchange.com/questions/221508/how-to-increase-column-limit-of-a-table-in-sqlite):

1. Go to download page [https://sqlite.org/download.html](https://sqlite.org/download.html)
2. Download the pre-release snapshot archive
3. Extract it with `tar -xvzf "sqlite-snapshot-202405081757.tar.gz"`
4. Change to that directory: `cd sqlite-snapshot-202405081757`
5. Run `./configure`
6. Edit the `Makefile`. Find inside the Makefile the line that starts with DEFS = and append to this line `-DSQLITE_MAX_COLUMN=32767`. Save the file
7. Run `make` to compile

After this, the newly-compiled library has to be moved into your anvi'o environment, at the same location where the original library was installed. This step will differ for everyone depending on their anvi'o installation, but we assume that if you are at this point, you probably know what you are doing :)

8. Copy the compiled library to the conda `lib` directory, which would look something like this (paths are not exact and depend on your system/anvi'o installation): `cp /path/to/compiled/sqlite/.libs/libsqlite3.so.0.8.6 /home/user/miniconda3/envs/anvio-7.1/lib/libsqlite3.so.0.8.6`
9. Copy the compiled executable to the conda `bin` directory, which would look something like this (paths are not exact and depend on your system/anvi’o installation): `cp /path/to/compiled/sqlite/sqlite3 /home/user/miniconda3/envs/anvio-7.1/bin/sqlite3`
10. Done :) Go forth and use (slightly) higher k-mer sizes!

</div>
