Generates TAB-delmited output files for %(functions)s from a single function annotation source across all %(contigs-db)s files it receives.

{:.notice}
For a simlar program that reports HMM hits instead, see %(anvi-gen-hmm-hits-matrix)s.

The input genomes, metagenomes, or loci for this program can be provided through an %(external-genomes)s, %(internal-genomes)s, %(genomes-storage-db)s, or any combination of these sources.

This program is very similar to %(anvi-display-functions)s, and can also perform a functional enrichment analysis on-the-fly if you provide it with an optional %(groups-txt)s file. But unlike, %(anvi-display-functions)s, this program will report TAB-delmited output files for you to further analyze.

{:.notice}
You can always learn about which functions are in a given %(contigs-db)s using the program %(anvi-db-info)s.

You can run the program on a set of %(contigs-db)s files with a specific source of function annotation:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-function-matrix -e %(external-genomes)s \
                         --annotation-source %(functions)s \
                         --output-file-prefix MY-GENOMES
{{ codestop }}

The command above will result in two files in your work directory (`MY-GENOMES-FREQUENCY.txt` and `MY-GENOMES-PRESENCE-ABSENCE.txt`) of type %(functions-across-genomes-txt)s.

In each of these files, the first few columns will describe functions (with a unique `key`, the full function name, and optionally the function accession ID), and the remaining columns will hold one value per genome.

These files will report raw frequency and presence/absence of functions across %(contigs-db)s files that you can use for downstream analyses.

## Per-population copy number normalization for metagenomic assemblies

If you want to get an idea of differences in functional capacity across different metagenomic assemblies, but if you do not have MAGs from these assemblies or if you wish to make use of a larger fraction of the sequence data and not only only those reads that are used to reconstruct genomes, looking at the raw frequencies or raw presence/absence data becomes less effective for any downstream analysis as almost all functions and metabolic modules known will likely occur in at least in one population in a given metagenome. Although, normalizing the raw frequencies based on the estimated number of populations in a given environment would make such comparisons across metagenomes much more effective.

Anvi'o includes a means to estimate the number of populations observed in a given assembly using single-copy core genes, which is used in %(anvi-display-contigs-stats)s, and Veseli et al. has previously demonstrated its utility by predicting [per-population copy number](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.89862) of metabolic modules observed across samples.

%(anvi-gen-function-matrix)s makes the same principle accessible with for functions via the flag `--add-per-population-copy-number`, which produces an additional output file with normalized copy numbers of the frequency of functions across samples:

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-function-matrix -e %(external-genomes)s \
                         --annotation-source COG20_FUNCTION \
                         --output-file-prefix MY-METAGENOMES \
                         --add-per-population-copy-number
{{ codestop }}

Adding the flag generates an additional output file, `MY-METAGENOMES-PER-POPULATION-COPY-NUMBER.txt`, of type %(functions-across-genomes-txt)s.

By dividing the frequency of each function in a given metagenomic assembly by the number of populations estimated to be present in that same assembly based on counts of single-copy core genes (SCGs) in each %(contigs-db)s: for each domain-specific SCG set, anvi'o takes the mode of the number of hits across all SCGs, and sums these per-domain estimates across Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.

The script relies on SCG annotations generated by %(anvi-run-hmms)s, and you need an %(external-genomes)s file to let it know which assemblies to compare.

A per-population copy number is an *average number of copies of a function per population*: a value near 1 means the function tends to occur once in every population, a value below 1 means it is present in only a fraction of the populations, and a value above 1 means it tends to occur in multiple copies per population (as is common for, e.g., transposases). If a given metagenome has single-copy core genes that are too sparse to yield a reliable estimate, anvi'o cannot compute its number of populations, and the per-population copy number values for that assembly will be reported as `NA`.

Alternatively, you can run it with a %(groups-txt)s that associates sets of genomes with distinct groups,

{{ codestart }}
anvi-gen-function-matrix -i %(internal-genomes)s \
                         --annotation-source COG20_FUNCTION \
                         --output-file-prefix MY-GENOMES \
                         --groups-txt groups.txt
{{ codestop }}

which would generate an additional file in your work directory, `MY-GENOMES-FUNCTIONAL-ENRICHMENT.txt`, of type %(functional-enrichment-txt)s.
